How to model single instance for active guidance :
1.Just send the segment_ID , segment_dist, x_pos and y_pos , from_type, to_type, flow (EP/RP). VLM context retrieval from the input is also injected into the LLM active guidance context.
2.Convert all mappings of location beforehand and send only region from it to the LLM.
The LLM should give the active guidance output 
3.In short whatever we have now is fine and ok, nothing needs to be changed for now, except for all kinds of mappings being mapped beforehand and sent as input to the LLM.

How to model a stream:
1. Each Stream state should have two components , one json component having segment ID , segment dist, x_pos and y_pos , from_type, to_type, flow (EP/RP), where from_type, to_type and flow will only be populated in the json at the timeline when the surgeon maps them in the computer (the surgeon should have the option of filling this out in the middle of the scan), in other times these fields should be empty. The other component of the stream would be the ultrasound video/image from which VLM identified fascia and which veins are present in the annotated image.
2. The task of the LLM is to guide the surgeon to guide the surgeon to the next state i.e. first it should guide towards where an EP can be found then when the surgeon himself marks the EP, then the LLM should provide guidance on where the next RP/EP could be found (to get the systematic steps, make use of the sufficiency prompt like how we systematically search for all the information in order to confirm a shunt-type). The guidance should not mention EP/RP and all but just instructions to move somewhere. If possible log the model thinking somewhere in the UI as well for each timestep or state. Then if the surgeon actually finds an RP, he should be able to mark them (keep in mind that the surgeon should be able to mark these fields at any point during the session).There should also be an option for the surgeon to end the session. Keep in mind that whenever the surgeon does not mark anything the 3 fields will be empty.
3. If possible model a leg diagram like this in the app and give the option to move across the leg using mouse and this will create the stream data as we move along the leg and this data should be continuously sent to the LLM system.
4. Another major challenge is creating an annotated ultrasound video which corresponds to this stream and the json component. See how this can be done. (The video should be played simultaneously as we move across the leg in the screen). Give me ideas on how this can be done, go through the video data we already have in the Data folder in Task_3_App somewhere)
5. There should be no rule based method except for mapping and all outputs should be strictly produced by the LLM and VLM.
6. Here again the stream is continuous, so inputs should be smoothly sent to the LLM and the output should be smoothly displayed as we move across the leg, it is  a continuous system.
7. Another important thing is for the system is to have some form of caching, so that the model remembers the previous state/timestamp and the corresponding parameters and the vein/fascia information and the LLM output and use all these as well as the incoming parameters from stream to produce the next guidance output.