Things to do for Task-1 

1. Make sure we implement the current framework that we used for testing in the files 'test_shunt_classification.py' and 'test_ligation_output.py' and the separation of the two sub tasks with different LLM calls and different rags being used tor both tasks, making sure we point to the new dB for ligation and no rag at all for shunt classification in the main app that I built for demo prototype.
2. Start working on the simple app that Jeffry suggested and the app should have the following things :
   2.1. Creating a simple offline chat-like desktop app that can be zipped and shipped and run on another localhost. The desktop app takes user input which is in natural language and will output (1)shunt classification + reasoning and (2) ligation strategy with ligation point + reasoning. User should be able to converse with it. The user messages should be stored as feedback and should be available to be viewed later.
   2.2 Here we make an assumption that the surgeon or doctor or user using it knows about the condition of the patient but not how to treat the patient with CHIVA technique.
   2.3 The user will describe the condition in a more natural language way like for example "there is reflux around SFJ , it flows to GSV till mid thigh, then it escapes to tributaries...." , "there is an EP from tributaries to the GSV and the blood again flows back to the tributaries".. etc etc .Basically the surgeon will not use the raw notations that we currently use in the clip data input so ideally the best LLM  solution should be able to work on both natural language and our clip formats.
   2.4 Another assumption that we make for this task-1 is that the surgeon knows the EP/RP or general conditions of the patient's blood flow beforehand but they have minimal or no knowledge of CHIVA techniques and thus the LLM will have to guide them on shunt classification, ligation strategies and ligation point and also give them visibility on how they did reasoning to arrive at the output for shunt classification and ligation.
   2.5 Make sure you create this app within the 'cmed_demo' folder but does not conflict with anything in the 'cmed_demo' app folder.     
3. Work on LLM comparison, making a report on comparison of different models available on 'groq' and also including the different small models that we can host on Ollama, comparing them based on metrics like latency, computing memory required on GPU/CPU, output quality and accuracy of generation.
4. Create a methodology document for the entire task.