
===== PAGE 1 =====
R  Delfrate - CHIVA strategy in the treatment of venous insufficiency 
 Vasculab  Journal of Theoretical and Applied Vascular Research (page 17) - JTAVR 2023;8(2):17-32 SAPHENOUS SPARING TREATMENTS SHORT REVIEW 
CHIVA strategy in the treatment of venous insufficiency 
R  Delfrate 1
1 Private Practice, Piacenza, Italy 
submitted: Jul 20, 2023, accepted: Aug 21, 2023, EPub Ahead of Print: Aug 27, 2023, published: Aug 31, 2023 
Conflict of interest: None 
DOI: 10.24019/jtavr.170  - Corresponding author:Dr. Roberto Delfrate, roberto.delfrate@icloud.com 
© 2023 Fondazione Vasculab impresa sociale ONLUS. All rights reserved. 
Abstract  The approach to the diagnosis and treatment 
of venous insufficiencies involves two opposing attitudes: 
demolition and conservation of the venous system. CHIVA 
is based on knowledge of the pathophysiology of venous 
insufficiency. Through an accurate and standard echo color 
Doppler investigation, a mandatory method that must be 
within the capabilities of a modern phlebologist, the causes 
of the increase in transmural pressure are identified, a 
map is prepared and finally a therapeutic strategy aimed 
at normalizing the transmural pressure is planned. CHIVA 
represents a scientific progress in the approach to venous 
insufficiency. The CHIVA strategy is applied mainly, but not only, with conservative surgical tactics based on the 
faithful reproduction of the strategy planned with the 
cartography. CHIVA respects venous function and seeks 
to preserve the GSV useful for all arterial surgery needs. 
Studies performed according to the rules of evidence-based 
medicine, Cochrane reviews and meta-analyses certify the 
validity of the CHIVA strategy in the treatment of venous 
insufficiencies of the lower extremities. 
Keywords  TransMural Pressure (TMP), Shunt, echo- 
Doppler, cartography, strategy 
Introduction 
CHIVA is the French acronym for “Cure 
conservatrice et Hemodynamique de l’Insuffisance 
Veineuse en Ambulatoire": conservative and hemodynamic 
treatment of venous insufficiency in out-patients. This 
treatment was proposed by Claude Franceschi in 1988 1-3.
It is based on a hemodynamic model of the venous 
pathophysiology where venous insufficiency is defined as 
the inability of the venous system to maintain a normal 
venous trans-mural pressure TMP, to fulfill its functions of 
tissue drainage, right heart pre-load, and thermoregulation. 
So, the excess of TMP is regarded as the cause of the 
symptoms and signs of venous insufficiency. Consequently, 
restoring a normal TMP is considered mandatory and 
sufficient to cure this disease. 
The venous system is made of cardiac, thoraco- 
abdominal, muscular pumps, venous network, and venous 
side of the micro-circulation. The TPM excess can be due 
to the malfunction of one or more of its components. TMP 
is the pressure resulting from the intra-venous pressure (IVP) and the extra-venous pressure (EVP) opposition. So, 
it increases with the rise of IVP, the decrease of EVP, 
and vice versa. IVP is composed of Residual Pressure 
(RP) provided by the arterial pressure through the micro- 
circulation resistance, Gravitational Hydrostatic Pressure 
(GHP) proportional to the vertical height of the venous 
blood column and Valvular Muscular Pump Pressure 
(VMPP) provided by the Valvular Muscular Pumps (VMP). 
CHIVA assesses and corrects specifically the GHP, 
VMPP and RP excesses. By fractioning the venous 
blood column, it corrects the Dynamic Fractioning of 
the Gravitational Hydrostatic Pressure (DFGHP) impaired 
by valve incompetence. It reduces the VMPP excess by 
disconnecting the source of the diastolic overloading flows 
and pressure. It prevents excessive RP by preserving the 
drainage through the original and compensatory veins. For 
the same reason, it preserves also any vein even if varicose 
and/or refluxing provided it suppresses the overloading 
component of the reflux. 
===== PAGE 2 =====
R  Delfrate - CHIVA strategy in the treatment of venous insufficiency 
 Vasculab  Journal of Theoretical and Applied Vascular Research (page 18) - JTAVR 2023;8(2):17-32 A flow is physiologically correct whatever its 
antegrade or retrograde direction, provided it is made 
only of the draining blood of its area (venosome) 4-6. It 
is conservative for hemodynamic reasons, i.e restoring a 
proper TMP which results in the cure of signs (cosmetics 
included) and symptoms of venous insufficiency. As the 
venous insufficiency cases are more or less complex 
according to their hemodynamic configuration, CHIVA 
strategy must be tailored for each anatomical-functional 
configuration. 
Some pioneers can be considered CHIVA precursors 7
because they related the fluid mechanics to the venous 
pathophysiology (Table 1). They described the reverse flow 
in the dilated great saphenous veins (GSV), the excess of 
pressure caused by a defect of blood column fragmentation 
due to valve incompetence, and favorable evolution of leg 
ulcers after high ligation of the GSV. 
Some decades after Benjamin Brodie 8, Friedrich 
Trendelenburg 9 (1890) observed that the varicose GSV 
compressed with a finger at the groin on a recumbent 
patient, inflated less quickly when standing up if he kept 
the pressure than when he released it (Trendelenburg Test). 
Georg Perthes, his assistant, noticed that by placing a 
tourniquet at the thigh, the varicose veins collapsed when 
the patient was walking, except in case of deep veins 
impairment (Perthes Test). 
Contrary to the dramatic occlusive effects of 
the femoral vein ligation, the varicose GSV ligation 
provided good outcomes, Trendelenburg suspected a “private circulation” where the superficial veins are drained 
back downwards into the deep veins through alternative 
pathways (perforators) thanks to the activity of muscle 
pumps. 
A century later Claude Franceschi took over the 
hemodynamic approach and developed complementary 
concepts thanks to the Doppler Ultrasound vascular 
investigation that he pioneered and published in the very 
first book in the world in 1977 10  as well as the first 
vascular Ultrasound imaging book in 1986 11 . He studied 
fluid mechanics to understand his observations, which 
led him to propose an hemodynamic model of venous 
pathophysiology. Being an angiologist who faced the 
everyday need for vital GSV grafts to treat arterial and 
coronary diseases, he took the most of this model to design a 
GSV conservative treatment of venous insufficiency named 
CHIVA, published in 1988. 
Over time, CHIVA was demonstrated better than the 
non-conservative methods by several reviews, randomized 
and controlled trials, and Cochrane Library reviews 12-17.
Nowadays, many options, conservative and ablative, are 
proposed to treat the primitive varicose veins of the lower 
extremities. 
The conservative consists of medical compression 
or CHIVA strategy that is eligible in all the cases, 
while ASVAL is ablative of the GSV tributaries and 
GSV conservative only in selected cases because it is 
based on different hemodynamic concepts 18 . The non- 
conservatives are represented by various surgical or 
endovenous procedures. 
Table I 
CHIVA precursors who described the hemodynamic aspects 
of the venous insufficiency and its therapeutic consequences 
Ambroise Paré 1509-1590: first GSV ligation at the middle height of the thigh. 
Everard Home 1756-1832: causal relation between valve incompetence, excess of hydrostatic 
pressure and consequent leg ulcer healing by GSV ligation. 
Tommaso Rima 1777-1843: hypothesis of a veins reflux refilling the varicose veins when standing 
up and the consequent effects of GSV ligation at the thigh. 
Benjamin Collins Brodie 1783-1862: fluid dynamic explanation of Rima’s hypothesis. 
Friedrich Trendelenburg 1844-1924: hypothesis of a venous “private circulation“ activated by 
walking. 
Georg Clemens Perthes 1869-1927: confirmation of “private circulation” stopped by deep veins 
impairment. 
Claude Franceschi 1988: hemodynamic approach of venous insufficiency. The CHIVA Strategy. 
===== PAGE 3 =====
R  Delfrate - CHIVA strategy in the treatment of venous insufficiency 
 Vasculab  Journal of Theoretical and Applied Vascular Research (page 19) - JTAVR 2023;8(2):17-32 
Figure 1 - Leg GSV Hystological specimen after CHIVA treatment. Hematoxylin and Eosin staining techinque on the left. 
Desmin immunohistochemistry staining technique on the right: smooth muscle cell in Brown. There is moderate intimal 
fibrosis, hypertrophy of the media and adventitia with vasa vasorum. Muscle fibers are well represented as a result of 
muscle work training. Three ordered layers of smooth muscle fibers: longitudinal on the intimal side, central circular, 
longitudinal on the adventitial side. Regular appearance of the endothelium of the intima layer. Normal hystoarchitecture. 
Figure 2 - B mode appearance of the thigh right and left GSV, 15 and 16 years after CHIVA 1 strategy: saphenous-femoral 
disconnection without arch section (TSFL:Triple Saphenous Femoral Ligation). GSV regular B-mode appearance. Right 
GSV 6 mm, left GSV 4.2 mm diameter at the upper third of the thigh. 
The Great Saphenous Veins preservation 
The GSV CHIVA conservation objective is dual: to 
restore its drainage function (whatever its flow direction) 
provided its pressure and flow content are normalized, 
sparing the GSV vein trunk for potential future bypass 1, 15,
16 . 2-3% of patients treated for varicose veins will need an arterial bypass 19-22 Some studies confirm the refluxing GSV 
eligibility for arterial bypass 22-23. 70% of varicose patients 
had venous segments eligible for coronary bypass 24 . It is 
demonstrated that GSV homograft prevails over the post- 
stripping cryopreserved GSV allografts 25-27.
===== PAGE 4 =====
R  Delfrate - CHIVA strategy in the treatment of venous insufficiency 
 Vasculab  Journal of Theoretical and Applied Vascular Research (page 20) - JTAVR 2023;8(2):17-32 
Figure 3 - valvulo-musclular pump and Dynamic 
Fractioning of the Gravitational Hydrostatic Pressure 
(DFGHP). Note the valves behavior. 
Figure 4 - anatomical-functional venous networks N1: in 
AC1 :sub-fascial deep veins. N2 in AC2. N2: Great and 
Small Saphenous veins, part of Anterior Saphenous, and 
Giacomini’s vein intra-fascial pathway N3 and N4 in AC3. 
N3: Great and Small Saphenous tributaries and other epi- 
fascial veins. N4L: Longitudinal connecting veins between 
two different level saphenous zones. N4T: Transversal 
connecting veins between Great and small Saphenous veins. 
Drainage physiological hierarchy: N3>N2>N1, N3>N1 
through junctions and perforators. 1 terminal valve, 2 
preterminal valve, 3 cardinal valve. 
Indeed, if GSV preservation is a condition for 
recurrence-rate reduction, is it also of great interest as a 
potential venous graft. In addition, histologic assessments 
were performed. The GSV is a propulsive vein, with a 
smooth muscular layer growing hyperplasic during life due 
to the workload that is daily subjected to 28 . This is also 
confirmed in the arterialized venous grafts in mice 29-30. The 
histoarchitecture of segments of the post-CHIVA preserved 
GSV was normal (fig.1) with hyperplastic smooth muscular 
layer 31 . So, the preserved post-CHIVA GSV may be useful for lower limb or coronary bypasses if the B-mode 
appearance is, most of the time, regular (fig.2). 
CHIVA Hemodynamic basis 
The venous hemodynamics takes into account various 
venous pressure parameters 32-33.
Transmural Pressure: TMP  is the pressure 
resulting from the intra-venous pressure IVP and the extra- 
venous pressure EVP opposition. So, it increases with 
the rise of IVP, decrease of EVP, and vice versa. IVP 
is composed of Residual Pressure (RP) provided by the 
arterial pressure through the micro-circulation resistance, 
Gravitational Hydrostatic Pressure (GHP) that varies with 
the vertical height of the venous blood column, and 
the Valvo-Muscular Pump Pressure (VMPP) provided 
by the Valvo-Muscular pumps (VMP). Gravitational 
Hydrostatic Pressure (GHP) and Dynamic Fractioning of 
the Gravitational Hydrostatic Pressure (DFGHP): in healthy 
individuals GHP varies with the vertical height of the blood 
column from the heart to the feet. So maximum in standing 
and minimum in horizontal position. 
It decreases when walking because the VMP closes 
alternately the upstream and downstream valves during the 
systolic and diastolic phases (fig.3): DFGHP. So, DFGHP 
is impaired in proportion to the deep and/or superficial 
venous valve incompetence. Restoring it, is one of the aims 
of CHIVA. Residual Pressure : physiologically, RP is low 
and varies only with the resistance of the micro-circulation. 
It increases pathologically in case of a venous obstacle to 
the draining flow, right heart failure or intra-abdominal 
cava vein compression. So CHIVA prevents RP excess by 
preserving the veins patency. 
Venous hierarchical drainage (fig.4 ): normally, 
the venous flow obeys a hierarchical drainage from the 
superficial to the deep venous network. N1 are all the deep 
veins below the muscular fascia; N2 are the saphenous axis 
veins (Great Saphenous Vein (GSV), Short Saphenous Vein 
(SSV), intra-fascial segment of the Anterior Accessory 
Saphenous Vein (AASV), and the Giacomini Vein (GV) 
located in inside the duplicate subcutaneous fascia above 
the muscular fascia (Egyptian eyes) 34- 38.
N3 are the veins above the subcutaneous fascia. 
N4 veins interconnect different levels of the same N2 
(N4L Longitudinal) or different N2 (N4T Transversal). The 
physiological drainage hierarchy is N3>N2>N1, N3>N1. 
The competent valves block the reflux triggered by any 
reverse, i.e cardio-fugal, pressure gradient PG (cough, 
Valsalva maneuver, diastolic phase of the VMP) so 
hampering the reversal of the hierarchical direction. 
===== PAGE 5 =====
R  Delfrate - CHIVA strategy in the treatment of venous insufficiency 
 Vasculab  Journal of Theoretical and Applied Vascular Research (page 21) - JTAVR 2023;8(2):17-32 
Figure 5 - OVS on the left. The flow enters the shunt due to 
the need for drainage in the presence of organic anatomical 
or functional obstruction or stenosis of the physiological 
venous drainage pathway. ODS on the right. Diastolic flow 
is not overloaded by any N1 flow, but only by N2. 
In case of superficial valve incompetence, this 
hierarchy is reversed, i.e N1>N2>N3, N1>N3, N2>N3, 
during the Valsalva maneuver and/or the lower limbs 
VMP diastole. CHIVA restores the hierarchy N3>N2>N1, 
N3>N1. Notice that even if the flow direction of some 
of N2 or N3 segments is retrograde (reflux) it plays its 
physiological role provided it obeys the proper hierarchy. 
Veno-venous shunts : a shunt is defined as a conduit 
connecting two points of a circuit that represent an 
additional pathway for the flow. Veno-venous shunts are 
veins overloaded by an additional flow provided by other 
veins. Their hemodynamic significance differs according 
to the feature of flow they divert from another vein. The 
place where the flow is diverted is called escape point EP 
and the distant place where it is restituted is called re- 
entry point RP. The blood that enters the shunt reverses the 
physiological hierarchy and adds its flow and pressure to 
the physiological drainage of the shunting vein. According 
to the type of the shunt, the overloading flow is activated at 
rest, during the systolic, diastolic or both phases of VMP. 
The Open Vicarious Shunt (OVS)  is a compensatory 
pathway activated at rest by the Residual Pressure and 
by the VMP systole (fig.5). The EP is N1>N2 or N1>N3 and it is activated by Paraná /Squeezing systole. RP is 
N3>N1 or N2>N1. It may be active at rest or only when 
evoked by a dynamic test. A dynamic obstacle exists and it 
bypasses it. Its rate of compensation effect is assessed by the 
Doppler measure of the Posterior Tibial Vein Pressure in a 
recumbent posture, at rest, and at stress 39-42. These shunts 
are respected by CHIVA. 
A Closed Shunt (CS)  is always made of an N1>N2 or 
N1>N3 EP; there is only one exception represented by a 
variant of shunt 2a with N2-N4L escape point. It works like 
a closed circuit because part of the diastolic refluxing flow 
entering N1 is recycled through the EP in the same shunt 
by the successive VMP diastole (fig.6). So CS confirms the 
Trendelenburg intuition. CHIVA disconnection of N1> N2 
or N1>N3 EP suppresses the overflow provided by N1. 
Open Deviated Shunt (ODS ) is never fed by N1>N2 
nor N1>N3 EPs, but N2>N3, so its diastolic flow is not 
overloaded by any N1 flow but only by N2 (fig.5). So, 
there is no recirculation, just a diastolic deviation. CHIVA 
disconnection of N2>N3 EP suppresses the overflow 
provided by N2. 
Mixed Shunt (MS)  combines CS and OVS. Their common 
EP is N1>N2 or N1>N3 EP and their common proximal 
segment is N2 or N3 which shows consecutive systolic and 
diastolic refluxes. Their EP and proximal venous segment 
are common and their terminal segments diverge at the 
Separation Point (SP) 43, 44  towards distinct Re-entry Points 
(fig.6). So, there is only a Paraná/squeezing diastolic flow 
in the CS terminal segment and only a systolic flow in 
the terminal OVS segment. Consequently, CHIVA doesn’t 
disconnect the common EP but only the terminal segment 
of the CS at the SP level. 
Duplex US assessment and venous 
cartography 
Duplex Ultrasound scanning is mandatory to perform 
an accurate venous anatomy-hemodynamic cartography 
because it is the key point of the strategy and tactics of the 
CHIVA treatment. The Echo Doppler of the lower limbs is 
performed using a 7-12 Mhz linear probe, Pulse Repetition 
Frequency (PRF) being adjusted between 0.75-1 kHz, 
capable of detecting even low-speed flow from 0.05-0.10m/ 
sec. A convex probe of 3-7 Mhz is also necessary. 
Hemodynamic maneuvers must be used to activate the 
pumps. 
Squeezing  is the most common maneuver, and 
consists of manually squeezing and releasing the muscle 
pump of the venous collector being analyzed, i.e. not 
only the calf. The Paraná  maneuver is preferable to the 
squeezing test because it activates more physiologically 
the VMP 45-47. It consists of a slight push to the waist of 
the patient which triggers a calf proprioceptive contraction- 
relaxation reflex. 
===== PAGE 6 =====
R  Delfrate - CHIVA strategy in the treatment of venous insufficiency 
 Vasculab  Journal of Theoretical and Applied Vascular Research (page 22) - JTAVR 2023;8(2):17-32 
Figure 6 - Closed Shunt (a). It is a private circulation. Blood recirculates in a group of veins and is withdrawn from the 
general circulation. It can involve superficial veins but also only veins in the N1 district. Mixed Shunt (b). it combines 
a CS and an OVS. 
The Valsalva test  consists of a blocked and forced 
expiration that reverses downwards the Pressure Gradient. 
It stops the flow of the competent veins but it reverses it 
through N1>N2 and N1>N3 EPs. Notice that it triggers a 
reflux throughout N2 and N3 only if N1>N2 or N1>N3 
junctions are incompetent. If N1>N2 or N1>N3 junctions are competent, it cannot trigger a N2 or N3 reflux neither in 
S0, even if these veins show a Paraná diastolic reflux. 
The Perthes maneuver  tests the effect of the eventual 
escape point disconnection on the varicose vein collapse as 
well as the quality of the RP. 
Escape points 
Pelvic Leak Points (PLP) : PLPs are 7 at each side 
of the perineum and the pubis. They represent the N1>N3 
refluxing perforators from the pelvic N1 down to N1>N3 
EP where they feed 4 or 5 Shunts types (see below). Their 
VMP diastolic reflux must be confirmed by a Valsava reflux 
because the VPM reflux is not specific N1>N3 EP reflux. 
Their exceptional permanent reflux at rest attests to their 
compensatory role OVS of a pelvic N1 obstruction. 
Three of them are fed by the parietal branches of the 
hypogastric vein. Female and male Obturator Point (OP) 
when the anterior muscular circumflex vein, the anterior 
branch of the Obturator Vein connects to the GSV at the 
groin. Superior and Inferior Gluteal Points (SGP-IGP) 
when N3 Valsalva reflux is fed by the superior and inferior 
gluteal veins. Three additional PLPs, Perineal Point (PP), 
Inguinal Point (IP), and Clitoris Point (CP) , were 
described by Franceschi 48-51 They are particularly present in 
women who had one or more previous pregnancies, where 
they are responsible for an important rate of varicose veins. 
They represent the N1>N3 refluxing perforators from the 
visceral branches of the Hypogastric Vein. 
The PP  (Fig.7) is the posterior vulvar veins perforate 
the Perineal Superficial Fascia just underneath the posterior 
quarter of the vulva-perineal fold. 
===== PAGE 7 =====
R  Delfrate - CHIVA strategy in the treatment of venous insufficiency 
 Vasculab  Journal of Theoretical and Applied Vascular Research (page 23) - JTAVR 2023;8(2):17-32 Table II 
Clinical conditions associated with increased TMP 
stenosis or obstruction of a venous segment or reflux with overload of a venous district 
iatrogenic from drugs, or collapse of arteriolar resistances from FAV 
preferential flow resulting from the angle of insertion of a perforator into a deep vein 
functional stenosis from tendon lamination, or postural clamps 
congenital absence of outflow pathways of malformative origin 
intense muscular activity with increased arterial flow and consequent overloading of the venous 
pathways 
TMP - trans-mural pressure 
The CP  (Fig.7)is the anastomotic plexus that 
connects the Internal Pudendal Vein, the Bulbar Vein, 
the Dorsal Clitoris Vein, and the External Pudendal Vein. 
The reflux can feed ipsilateral or contralateral perineal or 
anterior labial veins, the External Pudendal Vein, and then 
the GSV. 
An Intermediate Perineal Point (IPP)  also exists 
(Fig.7) and represents the hole of the Perineal Superficial 
Fascia through which the intermediate vulvar vein reaches 
the vulvar plexuses. 
The IP  (Fig.8) is the the superficial ring of the 
inguinal canal. It is fed by the refluxing vein of the Uterus 
Round Ligament (URLV) . The URLV reflux is most of 
the time fed by Gonadal veins reflux. Male I Point (MIP) : In the male, the gonadal vein, 
especially when refluxing (varicocele) may feed a reflux 
in the GSV directly or throughout the superficial epigastric 
veins. Male C Point (MCP) . Most rarely the GSV reflux 
is fed by the dorsal plexus of the penis which refluxes 
throughout an EP located at the subcutaneous fascia. 
Notice that the PLP reflux can feed any N2 or N3 
veins at any random level of the thigh and the leg and 
that an I, P, or C point reflux may cross the middle 
line and feed the varicose veins of the opposite limb .
The impact of a female pelvic escape point on a varicose 
vein is significant. In personal experience, in the 8.3% 
of all the varicose veins treated, a pelvic escape point 
was disconnected (90% female, 10% male). Overlooked 
pelvic escape points may cause a relapse of varicose veins, 
especially chaotic in case of ablation of the GSV 52-55.
Figure 7 - On the left patient position for P points echo-duplex check. In the mid image of a PP: the white arrow shows
the PP systolic Valsalva reflux, while the white dashed line represents the vulvar fascia. On the right are represented all 
the 6 perineal escape points: C, IPP, PP. The black line and arrow represent the varicose vein fed by the PP sys tolic 
Valsalva reflux 
===== PAGE 8 =====
R  Delfrate - CHIVA strategy in the treatment of venous insufficiency 
 Vasculab  Journal of Theoretical and Applied Vascular Research (page 24) - JTAVR 2023;8(2):17-32 
Figure 8 - Right IP. The systolic valsalva reflux is detectable 
in the round ligament venous plexus running into the 
inguinal canal from the internal ring and the medial 
subcutaneous ring (yellow arrow). The transversalis fascia 
and the fascia of the oblique external muscle are the 
hyperechoic lines detectable above and below the round 
ligament 
Figure 9 - Perforators appearance: linear straight 
appearance (a), upward branched (b), downward branched 
(c), direct confluence into a straight N1 collector generally 
the superficial femoral vein (d), confluence into a collateral 
of a main N1 collector generally the superficial femoral 
vein (e), confluence into an arch of an N1 collector 
generally a posterior tibial vein (f) 
Saphenous femoral junction (SFJ) : the SFJ is 
a strategic point where several different hemodynamic 
patterns may be misinterpreted. As a matter of fact, the 
N1>N2 reflux at the GSV end assessed by Paraná/squeezing 
is not specific of the incompetence of the terminal valve 
and must be every time confirmed by positive Valsalva. 
This reflux can be also due to a PLP. That is why Valsalva 
must check the arch tributaries. If it is positive, these 
tributaries are followed upwards until the Ep is detected. 
If Valsalva is negative, the Paraná reflux is just due to the incompetence of the pre-terminal valve below a competent 
terminal valve or a post-CHIVA disconnection SFJ (see 
below shunt 0). Notice that the physiologic flow of the arch 
tributaries may be evoked by Paraná/squeezing diastole, but 
it is always stopped by the Valsalva systole and released 
by the Valsalva diastole. When the SFJ is the EP of an 
OVS as Palma due to an iliac obstruction, it refluxes during 
the Paraná/squeezing systole. The reflux is successively 
systolic and diastolic in the case of Mixed Shunt (see 
below). It may also be an RP of the opposite SFJ EP. 
Saphenous popliteal junction (SPJ) : Its location is 
variable and the Saphenous popliteal junction may be not 
direct to the Popliteal vein but to a Gastrocnemian Vein. It 
is more subject to a Mixed Shunt because of constitutional 
stenosis of the Femoral Vein at the Hunter annulus. 
Perforators : are interconnecting veins between the 
deep (N1/AC1) and superficial venous system above the 
muscular fascia (N2, N2, N4/AC2, AC3). Perforators 
must be differentiated from venous collectors, which on 
the contrary are permanently and normally visible, and 
represent a system of veins draining from the surface to 
the depths, forming an interconnecting system between 
the venous network of the abdominal wall, gluteus, and 
lower limbs and the pelvic venous plexuses. They are 
generally, though not exclusively, visible in the event of 
overloading of a venous path, with the functional purpose 
of redistributing flows and pressures. Perforators represent 
an emergency defensive system activated by an increase in 
PTM (Table 2). Regardless of the anatomical location 56, 57 ,
different typologies of perforators exist according to their 
morphological appearance and confluence in N1 (Fig.9). 
From the anatomical and functional point of view, two 
different categories of perforators can be distinguished: 
direct (from the surface to an intermuscular vein) and 
indirect perforators (from the surface into an intramuscular 
vein). All the features just listed affect therapeutic strategy 
and clinical outcome. Normally flow goes from the surface 
to the deep through crosses, collectors, or perforating veins 
thanks to a favorable pressure gradient 58 .
The foot is the only exception. The closure of their 
valves prevents reflux when the gradient is reversed. The 
pressure gradient is physiologically reversed during the 
systole of the lower limbs and thoracoabdominal pumps 
(coughing, defecation efforts, Valsalva maneuver). It is 
reversed pathologically at rest as well as during pump 
systole when run-off resistances increase and consequently 
also the residual pressure). The reflux always manifests the 
valve incontinence of the perforator, therefore a pathology 
of the perforator vein, but this valvular pathology does 
not always create pathogenic conditions (venous function 
impairment). 
===== PAGE 9 =====
R  Delfrate - CHIVA strategy in the treatment of venous insufficiency 
 Vasculab  Journal of Theoretical and Applied Vascular Research (page 25) - JTAVR 2023;8(2):17-32 
Figure 10 - on the left 5.4 mm. paratibial direct continent perforator; Paraná systolic and diastolic inward flow. It’s a 
perfect re-entry point. On the right direct paratibial biphasic perforator: it’s a re-entry point. 
To correctly check perforator veins hemodynamic 
maneuvers are mandatory. Gravitational tests (static- 
squeezing, dynamic-Paraná) hypertensive test- Valsalva. 
The systole of the Valsalva maneuver increases N1 
collectors pressure, highlighting every incompetent 
perforator anywhere in the lower limbs. Gravitational 
maneuvers highlight open vicarious shunts. Echoduplex 
is necessary for the evaluation of superficial as well as 
deep venous paths. The echo-duplex check looks for escape 
points, re-entry points, and venous paths, to identify a 
venous shunt and prepare the cartographic report. The 
ambulatory non-invasive deep pressure measurement, at 
rest on both sides or after muscle activation of the flow, is 
necessary too. It’s necessary to understand if a perforator 
represents an escape point or a re-entry point as encoded 
by the CHIVA hemodynamic conservative strategy. A re- 
entry point  is activated by the same conditions as the EP 
it is connected to, but it flows inwards instead of outwards. 
Most of the time it is represented by the perforators below 
the knee. 
A reflux (upstream flow) through a perforator during 
muscle pump systole caused by manual compression of 
the calf or Parana maneuver is always an expression of a 
perforator pathology, but it may not be pathogenic in the 
absence of a deep obstruction if the diverted flow return 
downstream and continue towards the right heart: N1-N2- 
N1. The venous function is not impaired. The systolic 
reflux in a perforator vein during muscle pump contraction 
(gravitational tests) is pathological when it compensates for 
an obstacle in the deep allowing the outflow, and so tissue 
drainage. The systolic reflux of a perforator during the 
Valsalva maneuver is always pathological and pathogenic 
because it translates a reflux that continues in an inverted 
direction into the superficial network. The systolic diverted flow continues in a retrograde 
superficial venous path until it reaches a re-entry perforator 
thanks to a diastolic favorable pressure gradient (diastolic 
pump aspiration). perforator reflux activated by the muscle 
pumps diastole (gravitational static and dynamic tests), 
associated or not with deep reflux, is always pathological 
and also pathogenic because it causes a flow contrary 
to the direction of tissue drainage and generates an 
overload of flow and venous pressure in the district. Bi- 
Phasic perforator flow : frequently, essentially below the 
knee, the inward re-entry inflow evoked by the Paraná/ 
Squeezing diastole is preceded by a systolic outflow. The 
last one is of low hemodynamic relevance and is usually 
much less important than the inflow. Biphasic perforators 
may represent a re-entry point (Fig.10). Is the perforator 
diameter a suitable parameter to define a pathological and 
pathogenic perforator? In the AVF 2023 guidelines are 
considered pathologic the perforator veins with an outward 
flow duration ≥ 500 ms and a diameter ≥ 3.5 mm on DU 59 .
In my personal experience, re-entry perforators are 
often dilated by the excess pressure and flow rate of the 
N2/N3 overloaded by one or more Escape Points (Fig.10). 
It’s necessary to respect these re-entry perforators as they 
work to reduce the TMP. This analysis refers to the 
hemodynamic bases of venous pathophysiology confirmed 
by the results of the CHIVA treatment. For these reasons, 
the flow of perforators should be defined at rest, in systole 
and diastole of both the thoracoabdominal (Valsalva) and 
the muscle pump (dynamic/Paraná and static gravitational 
tests. Squeezing alone in a patient standing or sitting is not 
sufficient, and creates a risk of overtreatment. 
===== PAGE 10 =====
R  Delfrate - CHIVA strategy in the treatment of venous insufficiency 
 Vasculab  Journal of Theoretical and Applied Vascular Research (page 26) - JTAVR 2023;8(2):17-32 
Figure 11 - Shunt 0. A segment of Saphenous vein with 
the retrograde flow in diastole, also intermittent (after 
muscular activation), arising from the inflow of a trunk 
or arch collateral (a,b), or post-CHIVA (c). Respected 
hierarchy of drainage. 
Figure 12 - Shunt 1 on the left. Escape Points: terminal 
valve SFJ (red continuous line), SPJ (red dotted line), N2 
direct insufficient perforanting vein (blue line and blue 
circle). N1-N2-N1. Shunt 1 + 2 on the right: one or more 
Open Derivative (red dashed) Shunt(s) are added to shunt 
1. 
Figure 13 - Shunt 2a on the left side. Two distinct types of shunt 2a exist: ODS and CS (the only exception in shunts 2a. 
Only hydrostatic pressure increases in the ODS. There are no N2 segments with retrograde flow. Shunt 2b in the midle 
and Shunt 2c on the right. 
Shunts 
The following classification is consistent with what 
was established by the VII meeting of the European Chiva 
Association held in Teupitz in 2002 60, 61  and coherent 
with the shunt classification originally reported by Claude 
Franceschi in 1988 1 and Jorge Juan Samsó in 2003 62 .Shunt 0  (Zero) is a harmless shunt (fig.11). It is a 
vein that fulfills its physiological role despite its retrograde 
flow (reflux) because it is not overloaded and respects 
the physiological hierarchy. It may be the case of any 
refluxing N2 or N3 veins in healthy people or after CHIVA 
disconnection of CS and ODS EPs because it leaves behind 
a no more overloaded flow. It is activated only by the 
===== PAGE 11 =====
R  Delfrate - CHIVA strategy in the treatment of venous insufficiency 
 Vasculab  Journal of Theoretical and Applied Vascular Research (page 27) - JTAVR 2023;8(2):17-32 VMP diastole (Paraná/Squeezing) and not by the Valsalva 
systole. Notice that the alleged inflammatory role of 
oscillatory flow disappears after CHIVA even if retrograde. This is attested by a study regarding the inflammatory effect 
of oscillating flow 63 .
Figure 14 - Shunt 3. It’s a closed shunt. Escape point N1-N2, with an N3 or N4 interposing itself between the escape point 
and the re-entry to bypass an N2 continent segment. 
Figure 15 - Shunt 4 on the left: PLP red circle and 
continuous line, indirect perforator red circle and dashed 
line. A shunt type 2 (blue line and blue circle) can be 
associated with a shunt type 4: a direct re-entry on N2 and 
indirect re-entry through N3 exist. It's a shunt type 4+2. 
Different typologies of shunt 5 in the middle and on the 
right. 
Figure 16 - Two possible typologies of shunt 6. 
Shunt 1 : CS. TransMural Pressure increases due to 
an increase in Hydrostatic Pressure and the addition of 
Shunt Pressure It shows an N1>N2>N1 reflux triggered by 
both Paraná/Squeezing diastole and Valsalva systole. Three 
different escape points (N1-N2) are possible: the terminal valve of the SFJ as well as the SPJ, or a direct perforation 
of N2 (Fig.12). RP may be multiple along N1 and the more 
distal one is called Terminal RP. 
Shunt 2 : it shows an N2>N3 or N2>N4L, or 
N2>N4T reflux triggered by Paraná/Squeezing diastole 
===== PAGE 12 =====
R  Delfrate - CHIVA strategy in the treatment of venous insufficiency 
 Vasculab  Journal of Theoretical and Applied Vascular Research (page 28) - JTAVR 2023;8(2):17-32 but not by Valsalva systole. Three different types of 
shunt 2 exist: 2A, 2B, and 2C (Fig.13). Two distinct 
types of shunt 2a exist: ODS and CS (the only exception 
in shunts 2a). Only hydrostatic pressure increases in 
the ODS. There are no N2 segments with retrograde 
flow. Shunt 2b is an Open Derivative Shunt (ODS) 
with proximal saphenous incontinence and a re-entry path 
exclusively through N3, N4L, N4T. Only hydrostatic 
pressure increases. Shunt 2c is an open derivative shunt 
(ODS ) with proximal saphenous incontinence. Saphenous 
N2 re-entry point, without any interposition of continent 
N2 segment, and in addition through N3. Terminal 
valve continence, possible preterminal incontinence. Only 
hydrostatic pressure increases. 
Shunt 1+2 : CS. It's a shunt type 1 plus a shunt type 
2 (Fig.12). It is a Shunt 2 connected to a Shunt 1. It shows 
an N1>N2>N1 + N2>N3 reflux triggered by both Paraná/ 
Squeezing diastole and Valsalva systole. Notice that when 
the N1>N2 EP is disconnected, Valsalva doesn’t evoke 
anymore a N2>N3 reflux. One or more Shunt 2s may 
connect to the Shunt 1. In a shunt 1+2 the main RP is on 
N2, while in the shunt 2+1 it’s indirect. 
Shunt 3 : CS. N1>N2 reflux is evoked by both 
Paraná /squeezing diastole and Valsalva systole but N1 
doesn’t drain directly because intermediate RP is absent 
(Fig.14). So it drains into an incompetent N3 then directly 
or indirectly into a RP. Different types of shunt 3 may 
exist, with re-entry flow passing through an N4L/N4T to 
reach an N3-N1 re-entry point, or an N2. As sometimes 
the intermediate RP may be not seen whilst present, a re- 
entry test is possible. It consists in looking at the N2 flow 
when blocking N3 during a Paraná/squeezing maneuver or 
preferably Valsalva, particularly when the RP is searched 
at the thigh. TMP increases due to the presence of shunt 
pressure and increased hydrostatic pressure. 
Shunt 4 : CS. Its reflux is fed by N1>N3 EP 
(Perforator or Pelvic Point) then drains into N1 through a 
N2 segment: N1>N3>N2>N1 (Fig.15). 
Shunt 5 : CS. Its reflux is fed by N1>N3 EP 
(Pelvic or Perforator) then drains into N1 through a 
N1>N3>N2>N3>N1 (Fig.15). 
Notice that most of the time EP in Shunt 4 and 5 is 
a pelvic leak point, and N1 most of the time refluxes in 
one or more of the descending tributary of the GSV arch 
(Superficial Epigastric Vein, External Pudendal, Epigastric 
Vein) and through the Obturator veins in the anterior medial 
circumflex muscular vein. As the physiological and the 
overloaded flow of Shunts 4 or 5 are both descending, 
Paraná and Squeezing evoke a descending flow when the 
GSV vein is incompetent irrespectively of its content i.e. 
only physiologic or overloaded by a pelvic leak. The only 
way to distinguish them is the systolic phase of the Valsava maneuver which stops the physiologic flow but increases 
the overloading flow. 
Shunt 6 : CS. Its Paraná/squeezing diastolic, Valsalva 
systolic N3 reflux (Fig. 16). It’s fed by N1>N3 EP. The 
escape point is an indirect perforator draining into an N3 
collector. Two different typologies of shunt 6 exist N1-N3- 
N1 (no involvement of N2), and N1-N3-N2-N1 (N2 doesn’t 
show any refluxing segment). 
When a MS  combined with deep venous reflux and/ 
or obstruction: whatever N1 damage and impairment, the 
VMP can in some cases still provide an efficient diastolic 
inflow. In that case, a satisfactory diastolic reflux in N2 
and/or N3 and a Perthes test vein collapse confirm it. 
In that cases CHIVA disconnections can be performed. 
The absence of diastolic reflux and Perthes test collapse 
forbids any disconnection but doesn't identify the N1 
damage. No diastolic reflux and small or absent systolic 
flow in a large varicose N2 (usually GSV trunk) is due 
to a Deep Competitive Reflux (DCR) . Dominant systolic 
flow attests to a OVS due to an N1 hemodynamical 
significant obstruction. In addition, a Doppler Venous 
Pressure measurement in a recumbent posture is possible 
to assess the hemodynamic significance of a possible deep 
venous obstruction. 
Deep CHIVA 64 . I performed the disconnection of 
3 Femoral veins and in addition 6 Posterior Tibial Veins 
ligations, 5 at the middle third of the leg and one posteriorly 
to the medial malleolus. Deep CHIVA is also possible. 
It regards the diagnosis and treatment of the deep venous 
closed shunts. It obeys the same hemodynamic principles 
as CHIVA. Most of the time applied in Post-Thrombotic 
Syndrome (PTS). 
Post CHIVA Duplex US assessment : the 
disconnected veins are checked: patency, caliber, Paraná / 
Squeezing, and Valsalva maneuvers. Most of all the 
previously treated refluxing veins show normally a 
retrograde flow triggered by Paraná/Squeezing maneuvers 
because they are Shunts 0. Positive Valsalva is due to 
an N1>N2 or N1>N3 reflux recurrence or not treated 
(incomplete CHIVA procedure). As N2>N3 EPs are 
not activated by Valsalva, N2>N3 connections must be 
checked. 
Cartography and Mapping: cartography is a 
schematic drawing of a venous network that reports the flow 
direction and the related shunts of each specific individual 
configuration to tailor as well the strategy and the tactics 
of the eventual CHIVA treatment. Then waterproof echo- 
guided signs are drawn on the skin at the very points to be 
treated. 
Treatment 
CHIVA is eligible in any case of superficial venous 
insufficiency of the lower extremities. The CHIVA strategy 
===== PAGE 13 =====
R  Delfrate - CHIVA strategy in the treatment of venous insufficiency 
 Vasculab  Journal of Theoretical and Applied Vascular Research (page 29) - JTAVR 2023;8(2):17-32 is also applicable in deep venous insufficiency to disconnect 
closed shunts for treatment of ulcers resistant to non- 
invasive therapy. 
Strategy 
The CHIVA strategy aims at the TMP restoration, the 
prevention of the varicose recurrence and the preservation 
of the eventual venous grafts by : 
- Gravitational hydrostatic pressure fractionation 
- Closed and Open Deviated Shunt disconnection 
- Veins and Re-entry Perforators preservation 
- Open vicarious shunt preservation 
- GSV preservation for eventual bypass need 
Shunts 1, 2, 4, 5, 6 are disconnected in one stage. 
Shunts 3 and mixed shunts are subject to peculiar 
strategies. 
In shunt 3 the intermediate N2 re-entry perforator 
is absent. So the simultaneous N1>N2 and N2>N3 
disconnection would leave behind a thrombosed GSV trunk because no more drained. To avoid it, two strategies are 
proposed. The first one consists of a two steps procedure. 
The first step disconnects the N2>N3 Eps that restores the 
GSV antegrade flow 65, 66  but is rarely sustainable because 
it leaves behind a high GHP column which causes a redo 
N1>N2 reflux due to secondary RP opening. So, in that 
case, a second step disconnects later the N1>N2 (SFJ) when 
the reflux recurs. The second strategy is preferable when 
possible, i.e. when the competent GSV trunk below the 
N2>N3 EP is present and not hypoplastic. It consists of the 
devalvulation 51  of the competent segment of the trunk so 
that it allows reflux down to a lower RP perforator. Usually, 
this procedure is followed by a transient thrombosis and 
then a complete restore of the GSV trunk. 
In mixed shunts, the common escape point is not 
disconnected but only the distal segment that diverges 
towards the CS RP. In Shunts 4 and 5, the disconnection of 
the PLPs can be done without any prior pelvic endovenous 
procedures in the absence of true Pelvic Compression 
symptoms without significant recurrence 39 .
Tactics 
Most of the time the incision is cosmetic short under 
local anesthesia (fig 11). All sutures are non-absorbable 
to avoid any redo to angiogenesis caused by inflammatory 
consumption of the thread. The disconnections should 
avoid leaving behind any stump. The N2>N3 disconnection 
is a division-ligation of N3 flush N2 with 2 to 3 cms 
phlebectomy. The PLP disconnections are division ligation 
+ fascia suture procedures. 
SFJ disconnection is performed flush the Common 
Femoral vein completed with a clip at the very SFJ. 
The disconnection consists of Crossotomy instead of Crossectomy because preserves the arch tributaries to 
prevent cavernomatous recanalization 67 . To reduce the risk 
of bleeding in an ambulatory operation, a peculiar Triple 
Sapheno-Femoral Ligation (TSFL) was proposed 68 .
In the case of Short Saphenous vein reflux, the SPJ 
disconnection is most of the time performed below the 
Giacomini vein junction 69-71 and always in case of mixed 
shunt; the muscle fascia must be properly sutured with 
non-absorbable thread. Light compression + 12 days of 
preventive anticoagulation are prescribed. 
Outcomes 
Many studies were done for 30 years over the world. 
All of them showed the non-inferiority of CHIVA vs 
other Open surgery or endovenous methods. Moreover, 
RCTs12-15 and Cochrane reviews 16-17 CHIVA vs Stripping, 
CHIVA vs Laser, CHIVA vs all the other methods attest to the CHIVA prevailing in terms of satisfactory clinical 
outcomes. recurrence and complications 72-74. The clinical 
relief of the symptoms is followed by a progressive cure 
of the signs such as varicose veins complete collapse, skin 
damage and ulcers. 
True CHIVA or Pseudo CHIVA 
Nowadays several studies certify the reliability of 
the CHIVA strategy for the treatment of CVI: starting 
from the first pioneering EBM 12-15, to the Cochrane review 
in 2015 16-17 and other recently published papers 73-74. But 
CHIVA needs a learning curve to avoid “bad CHIVA” 
procedures due to the lack of correct hemodynamic 
evaluation and cartography, as any other strategy or 
technique of surgery. CHIVA performed by experts is better than stripping, but good stripping is better than 
bad CHIVA performed by non-experts 75 . CHIVA is a 
complex approach, and high-level training and experience 
are needed to attain the results presented in RCT. 
Venous specialists require considerable education and 
determination to learn this approach. The best results are 
achieved if the same specialist can carry out both the 
hemodynamic and cartography phases and the surgical 
===== PAGE 14 =====
R  Delfrate - CHIVA strategy in the treatment of venous insufficiency 
 Vasculab  Journal of Theoretical and Applied Vascular Research (page 30) - JTAVR 2023;8(2):17-32 procedure. Otherwise,  team a composed of a hemodynamic 
echo-duplex specialist and a surgeon is required. In this 
latter case, the surgeon must attend the fundamental phase 
of preoperative cartography to eliminate every possible 
mistake during surgery. To conclude, to increase the quality of the surgical application of the cartographic strategy, it 
is possible to perform an intra-operative b-mode or echo- 
duplex evaluation if the safety or accuracy of the procedure 
requires it. 
Conclusion 
CHIVA could look reluctant because of its steep 
learning curve. Yet, it is easy for those who have learned 
the hemodynamic basis and trained beside a mentor. The 
satisfaction doesn’t regard only the good clinical outcomes of a low-cost and mini-invasive surgery, but also the chance 
offered to the patient for a future potential vital necessity of 
a venous graft. 
References 
1) Franceschi C. Théorie et pratique de la cure conservatrice 
et hémodynamique de l’insuffisance veineuse en ambulatoire [Theory 
and practice of conservative and haemodynamic treatment of venous 
insufficiency in outpatients]. Précy-sous-Thil France Editions de 
l’Armançon 1988. 
2) Franceschi C. The conservative and hemodynamic treatment 
of ambulatory venous insufficiency. Phlebologie. 1989 Nov- 
dec;42(4):567-8 
3) Franceschi C. Ambulatory and hemodynamic treatment of 
venous insufficiency (CHIVA cure). J Mal Vasc. 1992;17(4):291-300 
4) Taylor GI, Palmer JH. The vascular territories (angiosomes) 
of the body: experimental studies and clinical applications. Br J Plast 
Surg. 1990;40:113-141 
5) Taylor G I, Doyle M, McCarten G. The Doppler probe for 
planning flaps: anatomical study and clinical applications. Br J Plast 
Surg. 1990;43:1-16 
6) Taylor GI, Caddy CM, Watterson PA, Crock JG. The venous 
territories (venosomes) of the human body: experimental study and 
clinical implications. Plast Reconstr Surg. 1990 Aug;86(2):185-213. 
doi: 10.1097/00006534-199008000-00001 .
7) Tessari L. Histoire des evéinages: des origines au dèbut du 
XXe siècle [History of venous surgery: from the origins to the beginning 
of the 20th Century]. Phlebologie. 2000;53(2):259-65 
8) Brodie B. Lectures illustrative of various subjects in 
Pathology and Surgery. By Sir B. C. Brodie, Bart., F.R.S., Serjeant- 
Surgeon to the Queen, &c. London: Longman & Co., 1846. Lecture 
VIII and IX, On Varicose Veins and Ulcers of the Leg. Pages 
157-191. Available from https://archive.org/details/b21922810/page/ 
n7/mode/2up?view=theater 
9) Trendelemburg F. Über die Unterbindung der Vena saphena 
magna bei unterschenkel unterschenkel varicen [About the ligation of 
the great saphenous vein in lower leg varicose veins]. Beiträge zur 
klinischen Chirurgie. 1890;7:195-204 
10) Franceschi C. L’Investigation vasculaire par 
ultrasonographie Doppler [Vascular investigation by Doppler 
ultrasonography]. Masson Ed, Paris 1977 
11) Franceschi C, Franco G, Luizy F, Tanitte M. Précis 
d’echotomographie vasculaire. [Manual of vascular echotomography] 
Vigot Ed, Paris, 1986 
12) Carandina S, Mari C, De Palma M, Marcellino MG, Cisno 
C, Legnaro A, Liboni A, Zamboni P. Varicose vein stripping vs 
haemodynamic correction (CHIVA): a long term randomised trial. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 2008 Feb;35(2):230-7. doi: 10.1016/
j.ejvs.2007.09.011 
13) Parés JO, Juan J, Tellez R, Mata A, Moreno C, Quer FX, 
et al. Varicose vein surgery: stripping versus the CHIVA Method: a 
randomized controlled trial. Annals of Surgery. 2010;251(4):624–31. 
14) Iborra-Ortega E, Barjau-Urrea E, Vila-Coll R, Ballon- 
Carazas H, Cairols-Castellote MA. Comparative study of two surgical 
techniques in the treatment of varicose veins of the lower extremities: 
results after five years of followup. Angiología. 2006;58(6):459–68. 
15) Zamboni P, Cisno C, Marchetti F, Mazza P, Fogato L, 
Carandina S, De Palma M, Liboni A. Minimally invasive surgical 
management of primary venous ulcers vs. compression treatment: 
a randomized clinical trial. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 2003 
Apr;25(4):313-8. doi: 10.1053/ejvs.2002.1871 . Erratum in: Eur J Vasc 
Endovasc Surg. 2003 Sep;26(3):337-8. 
16) Bellmunt-Montoya S, Escribano JM, Dilme J, Martinez- 
Zapata MJ. CHIVA method for the treatment of chronic venous 
insufficiency. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2015 Issue 6. 
Art. No.: CD009648. doi: 10.1002/14651858.cd009648.pub3 .
17) Bellmunt-Montoya S, Escribano JM, Pantoja Bustillos 
PE, Tello-Díaz C, Martinez-Zapata MJ. CHIVA method for the 
treatment of chronic venous insufficiency. Cochrane Database of 
Systematic Reviews 2021, Issue 9. Art. No.: CD009648. doi: 
10.1002/14651858.CD009648.pub4 .
18) Chastanet S, Pittaluga P. Ten-Year Outcomes of Treatment 
of Varicose Veins by Ambulatory Selective Ablation of Varices Under 
Local Anesthesia (ASVAL). J Vasc Surg Venous and Lymphatic 
Disorders. March 2018;6(2):289 
19) Papakonstantinou NA, Baikoussis NG, Goudevenos J, 
Papadopoulos G, Apostolakis E. No touch technique of saphenous vein 
harvesting: Is great graft patency rate provided? E. J Thorac Cardiovasc 
Surg. 2015 Oct;150(4):880-8 
20) Samano N, Geijer H, Liden M, Fremes S, Bodin L, Souza 
D. The no-touch saphenous vein for coronary artery bypass grafting 
maintains a patency, after 16 years, comparable to the left internal 
thoracic artery: a randomized trial. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2015 
Oct;150(4):880-8. doi: 10.1016/j.jtcvs.2015.07.027 . ClinicalTrials.gov 
NCT01686100. Ninos Samano, Örebro County Council, 2012. 
21) Twine CP, McLain AD. Graft type for femoro- 
popliteal bypass surgery. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 
2010, Issue 5. Art. No.: CD001487. Updated version by Ambler 
GK, Twine CP. 2018, Issue 2. Art. No.: CD001487. doi: 
10.1002/14651858.CD001487.pub3
===== PAGE 15 =====
R  Delfrate - CHIVA strategy in the treatment of venous insufficiency 
 Vasculab  Journal of Theoretical and Applied Vascular Research (page 31) - JTAVR 2023;8(2):17-32 22) Moritz A, Grabenwöger F, Raderer F, Ptakovsky H, 
Magometschnigg H, Ullrich R, Staudacher M. Use of varicose veins as 
arterial bypass grafts. Cardiovasc Surg. 1993 Oct;1(5):508-12. 
23) Lofgren EP. In Bergan JJ, Yao JST (eds). Surgery of the 
veins 1985, 285-299. 
24) Cohn JD, Korver KF. Selection of saphenous vein conduit 
in varicose vein disease. Ann Thorac Surg. 2006 Apr;81(4):1269-74 
25) Streichenberger R, Barjoud H, Adeleine P, Larese A, Nemoz 
C, Chatelard P, Nedey C, Sabben. Allogreffes veineuses conservées à 
4°C dans les pontages sousinguinaux: résultats à long terme dans 170 
cas. [Venous allografts stored at 4°C for the infrainguinal bypass: long 
term results in 170 cases] Ann Chir Vasc. 2000;14:553-60. 
26) Masmejan S, Deslarzes-Dubuis C, Petitprez S, Longchamp 
A, Haller C2, Saucy F, Corpataux JM, Déglise S. Ten Year Experience 
of Using Cryopreserved Arterial Allografts for Distal Bypass in Critical 
Limb Ischaemia. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 2019 Jun;57(6):823-31 
27) Ziza V, Canaud L, Gandet T, Molinari N, Alonso W, 
Chastan R, Branchereau P, Picard E. Outcomes of cold-stored venous 
allograft for below-knee bypasses in patients with critical limb 
ischemia. J Vasc Surg. 2015 Oct;62(4):974-83 
28) Chiarugi G, Bucciante L. Istituzioni di anatomia dell’uomo 
[Institutions of human anatomy]. Francesco Vallardi ed. XI edition. 
1975, vol 2, chapter 12 
29) Kwei S, Stavrakis G, Takahas M, Taylor G, Folkman MJ, 
Gimbrone MA Jr, García-Cardeña G. Early adaptive responses of the 
vascular wall during venous arterialization in mice. Am J Pathol. 2004 
Jan;164(1):81-9. doi: 10.1016/S0002-9440(10)63099-4 .
30) Westerband A1, Crouse D, Richter LC, Aguirre ML, 
Wixon CC, James DC, Mills JL, Hunter GC, Heimark RL. Vein 
adaptation to arterialization in an experimental model. J Vasc Surg. 
2001 Mar;33(3):561-9 
31) Delfrate R. Thanks to the CHIVA strategy, may the 
histoarchitecture of great saphenous vein-sparing, make it suitable as 
graft for bypasses? Veins and Lymphatics. 2019;8(1). doi: 10.4081/
vl.2019.8227 
32) Franceschi C, Zamboni P. Principles of venous 
hemodynamics. Hauppage, NY: Nova Science Publisher. 2009 
33) Franceschi C. Dynamic Fractionizing, of Hydrostatic 
Pressure, Closed and Open Shunts, Vicarious Varicose Evolution: Have 
these concepts made the treatment of varices evolve? Phlebologie. 
2003;56(1):61-66
34) Delfrate R, Grilli N. A new diagnostic approach to 
varicose veins: haemodynamic evaluation and treatment. Lorena Dioni 
Publisher. 2014 ISBN 978-88-98-681-00-6 
35) Passariello F, Carbone R. Anatomia ecografica normale e 
patologica. In Passariello F (Editor) "La Chirurgia della Vena Safena 
Esterna". [Surgery of the shorter saphenous vein] pp 28-29. Napoli, 
New Print, 1991. 
36) Bailly MJ. La cure hémodynamique de l'insuffisance 
veineuse en ambulatoire (CHIVA). [Hemodynamic cure of venous 
insufficiency in outpatients (CHIVA)] Journal de maladies vasculaires. 
1992;17:241-9.
37) Bailly MJ. Cartographie CHIVA. Encycl. Med. Chir. (Paris, 
France). Techniques chirurgicales - Chirurgie vasculaire. 43-161-B, 
1995, 4p.38) Caggiati A. The saphenous venous compartments. Surg 
Radiol Anat. 1999;21(1):29-3. 
39) Zamboni P, Portaluppi F, Marcellino MG, Manfredini 
R, Pisano L, Liboni A. Ultrasonographic assessment of ambulatory 
venous pressure in superficial venous incompetence. J Vasc Surg. 
1997b;26(5):796–802
40) Norris CS, Beyran A, Barnes RW. Quantitative 
photoplethysmography in chronic venous insufficiency: a new method 
of noninvasive estimation of ambulatory venous pressure. Surgery. 
1983;94:758–64.
41) Bartolo M, Nicosia PM, Antignani PL, Raffi S, Ricci 
S, Marchetti M, et al. Noninvasive venous pressure measurements 
in different venous diseases. A new case collection. Angiology. 
1983;34(11):717-23
42) Bartolo M. Antignani PL, Nicosia PM, Todini AR. 
Noninvasive venous pressure measurement and its validation. Int 
Angiol. 1988;7:182-89 
43) Passariello F. The systo-diastolic reflux. JTAVR 2019;4(3). 
doi: 10.24019/jtavr.37 
44) The Systo-Diastolic Event (Oct-Nov, 2012). A Vasculab 
Debate. doi: 2012.SYSTODIASTOLIC  http://www.vasculab.it/ 
systodiastolic.xml 
45) Passariello F, Cappelli M, Ermini S. The Vasculab 
Manoeuvre: Simulating walking in venous investigations. Reviews 
in Vascular Medicine. 2016 Sep;6–7:20–8. doi 10.1016/ 
j.rvm.2016.08.002 
46) Ermini S, Passariello F, Cappelli M, Franceschi C. 
Experimental validation of the Paraná manoeuvre compared to the 
squeezing test. Journal of Theoretical and Applied Vascular Research. 
2017 Dec 31;2(2):97–105. doi: 10.24019/jtavr.42 
47) Franceschi C. Mesures et interprétation des flux veineux lors 
des manœuvres de stimulation. Compressions manuelles et manœuvre 
de Paraná. Indice dynamique de reflux (IDR) et Indice de Psatakis. 
[Measures and interpretation of venous flow in stress tests. Manual 
compression and Paraná manoeuvre. Dynamic reflux index and 
Psatakis index] J Mal Vasc. 1997 May; 22(2):91-5. 
48) Delfrate R. Anatomy of Pelvic leak points in the context 
of varicose veins. Phlebologie. 2021 Jan 18;50(1):42–50. doi: 10.1055/
a-1309-096 
49) Franceschi C, Bahnini A. Points de fuite pelviens viscéraux 
et varices des membres inférieurs [Pelvic visceral leak points and 
varicose veins of the lower limbs] Phlébologie. 2004;57:37-42 
50) Franceschi C, Bahnini A. Treatment of lower extremity 
venous insufficiency due to pelvic leak points in women Ann Vasc 
Surg. 2005;19:284-288 
51) Franceschi C. Anatomie fonctionnelle et diagnostic des 
points de fuite bulboclitoridiens chez la femme (point C) [Functional 
anatomy and diagnosis of bulboclitoral leak points in women (C point)]. 
J Mal Vasc. 2008;33:42 
52) Jiang P, Van Rij AM, Christie RA, Hill GB, Thomson 
IA. Non-saphenofemoral Venous Reflux in the Groin in Patients with 
Varicose Veins. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 2001;21:550-557 
53) García-Gimeno M, Rodríguez-Camarero S, Tagarro- 
Villalba S, Ramalle-Gomara E, González-González E, González 
Arranz MA, López García D, Vaquero Puerta C. Duplex mapping of 
2036 primary varicose veins. J Vasc Surg. 2009;49:681-689 
===== PAGE 16 =====
R  Delfrate - CHIVA strategy in the treatment of venous insufficiency 
 Vasculab  Journal of Theoretical and Applied Vascular Research (page 32) - JTAVR 2023;8(2):17-32 54) Delfrate R, Bricchi M, Franceschi C. Minimally-invasive 
procedure for pelvic leak points in women. Veins and Lymphatics. 
2019;8(1). doi: 10.4081/vl.2019.7789 
55) Zamboni P, Mendoza E, Gianesini S. Saphenous vein- 
sparing strategies in Chronic Venous Diseases. Springer. Chapter 8 
Delfrate, Mendoza. 2018. ISBN 978-3-319-70638-2 
56) Caggiati A, Bergan JJ, Gloviczki P, Eklof B, Allegra C, 
Partsch H. International Interdisciplinary Consensus Committee on 
Venous Anatomical Terminology. Nomenclature of the veins of the 
lower limb: extensions, refinements, and clinical application. J Vasc 
Surg. 2005 Apr;41(4):719-24. doi: 10.1016/j.jvs.2005.01.018 .
57) Cavezzi A, Labropoulos N, Partsch H, Ricci S, Caggiati 
A, Myers K, Nicolaides A, Smith PC. Duplex ultrasound investigation 
of the veins in chronic venous disease of the lower limbs--UIP 
consensus document. Part II. Anatomy. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 
2006 Mar;31(3):288-99. doi: 10.1016/j.ejvs.2005.07.020 .
58) Lee BB, Nicolaides AN, Myers K, Meissner M, Kalodiki E, 
Allegra C, Antignani PL, Bækgaard N, Beach K, Belcaro G, Black S, 
Blomgren L, Bouskela E, Cappelli M, Caprini J, Carpentier P, Cavezzi 
A, Chastanet S, Christenson JT, Christopoulos D, Clarke H, Davies 
A, Demaeseneer M, Eklöf B, Ermini S, Fernández F, Franceschi C, 
Gasparis A, Geroulakos G, Gianesini S, Giannoukas A, Gloviczki P, 
Huang Y, Ibegbuna V, Kakkos SK, Kistner R, Kölbel T, Kurstjens RL, 
Labropoulos N, Laredo J, Lattimer CR, Lugli M, Lurie F, Maleti O, 
Markovic J, Mendoza E, Monedero JL, Moneta G, Moore H, Morrison 
N, Mosti G, Nelzén O, Obermayer A, Ogawa T, Parsi K, Partsch 
H, Passariello F, Perrin ML, Pittaluga P, Raju S, Ricci S, Rosales 
A, Scuderi A, Slagsvold CE, Thurin A, Urbanek T, M VAN Rij A, 
Vasquez M, Wittens CH, Zamboni P, Zimmet S, Ezpeleta SZ. Venous 
hemodynamic changes in lower limb venous disease: the UIP consensus 
according to scientific evidence. Int Angiol. 2016 Jun;35(3):236-352. 
59) Gloviczki P, Lawrence PF, Wasan SM, Meissner MH, 
Almeida J, Brown KR, Bush RL, Di Iorio M, Fish J, Fukaya E, 
Gloviczki ML, Hingorani A, Jayaraj A, Kolluri R, Murad MH, Obi AT, 
Ozsvath KJ, Singh MJ, Vayuvegula S, Welch HJ. The 2022 Society 
for Vascular Surgery, American Venous Forum, and American Vein 
and Lymphatic Society clinical practice guidelines for the management 
of varicose veins of the lower extremities. Part I. Duplex Scanning 
and Treatment of Superficial Truncal Reflux: Endorsed by the Society 
for Vascular Medicine and the International Union of Phlebology. J 
Vasc Surg Venous Lymphat Disord. 2023 Mar;11(2):231-261.e6. doi: 
10.1016/j.jvsv.2022.09.004 .
60) Criado E, Juan J, Fontcuberta J, Escribano JM. 
Haemodynamic surgery for varicose veins: rationale, and anatomic 
and haemodynamic basis. Phlebology: The Journal of Venous Disease. 
2003 Dec 1;18(4):158–66 
61) Yun S, Hwang M-O. The Teupitz Shunt Classification for 
CHIVA Strategy. Annals of Phlebology. 2023 Jun 30;21(1):1–4 
62) Juan-Samsó J, Escribano-Ferrer JM, Rodríguez-Mori A, 
Bofill-Brossa R, Matas-Docampo M. Cirugía hemodinámica venosa en 
el tratamiento del síndrome varicoso [Hemodynamic venous surgery in 
the treatment of varicose syndrome]. Angiología. 2003;55(5):460-75. 
63) Tisato G, Zauli G, Gianesini S, Menegatti E, Brunelli L, 
Manfredini R, Zamboni P, Secchiero P. Modulation of Circulating Cytokine-Chemokine Profile in Patients Affected by Chronic Venous 
Insufficiency Undergoing Surgical Hemodynamic Correction. Journal 
of Immunology Research. 2014 Mar 25;2-10 doi: 10.1155/2014/473765
64) Franceschi C.: Hémodynamique de la maladie 
postphlébitique: conséquences diagnostiques et thérapeutiques. 
[Hemodynamics of post-thrombotic disease: diagnostic and therapeutic 
consequences] Journal des Maladies Vasculaires. 2008 Mar;33:S5. 
65) Passariello F. Suppression of the sapheno-femoral reflux 
by pure non-saphenous phlebectomy and anatomical structure of the 
reflux. Acta Phlebol. 2008;9:105-7 
66) Passariello F. GSV calibre reduction and reflux elimination 
by tributaries disconnection: evidences and hypotheses. Acta Phlebol. 
2013;14:25-30
67) Cappelli M, Molino-Lova R, Giangrandi I, Ermini S, 
Gianesini S. Ligation of the saphenofemoral junction tributaries as risk 
factor for groin recurrence. J Vasc Surg Venous Lymphat Disord. 2018 
Mar;6(2):224-229. doi: 10.1016/j.jvsv.2017.09.005 .
68) Delfrate R, Bricchi M, Franceschi C, Goldoni M. Multiple 
ligation of the proximal greater saphenous vein in the CHIVA treatment 
of primary varicose veins. Veins and Lymphatics. 2014;3(1). doi: 
10.4081/vl.2014.1919 
69) Passariello F, Carbone R. Nuove strategie per la Chirurgia 
della Safena Esterna. [New strategies for the surgery of the shorter 
saphenous vein] In Passariello F (Editor) "La Chirurgia della Vena 
Safena Esterna". [Surgery of the shorter saphenous vein] Napoli, New 
Print, 1991. Translation and reprint at doi: 10.24019/jtavr.22 
70) Passariello F, Carbone R. Chirurgia dell'Arco della Safena 
Esterna. [Surgery of the arch of the shorter saphenous vein] Min. 
Angiol. vol. 17, Suppl. 3 al n. 2, pag. 149-156, Ed. Min. Medica, Torino 
(Aprile-Giugno 1992). 
71) Passariello F. The External Saphena Geometry. Surgical 
choices. VI Réunion de L'Association Européenne de Chiva. Lagos- 
Agarve, Portugal 2000. Available at the address http://web.tiscali.it/ 
afunc/chivaref/passarie/sext.htm  at the date of Feb 28, 2022. Reprint at 
DOI: 10.24019/jtavr.36 
72) Chan CY, Chen TC, Hsieh YK, Huang JH. Retrospective 
comparison of clinical outcomes between endovenous laser and 
saphenous vein-sparing surgery for treatment of varicose veins. World 
J Surg. 2011 Jul;35(7):1679-86 doi: 10.1007/s00268-011-1093-8 .
73) Hua Wang, Qianyi Chen, Zhewei Fei, Endong Zheng, 
Zhanghui Yang, Xiaowang Huang. Hemodynamic classification and 
CHIVA treatment of varicose veins in lower extremities (VVLE). Int J 
Clin Exp Med. 2016;9(2):2465-2471 
74) Guo L, Huang R, Zhao D, Xu G, Liu H, Yang J, 
Guo T. Long-term efficacy of different procedures for treatment of 
varicose veins: A network meta-analysis. Medicine (Baltimore). 2019 
Feb;98(7):e14495. doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000014495 .
75) Milone M, Salvatore G, Maietta P, Sosa Fernandez LM. 
Milone F. Recurrent varicose veins of the lower limbs after surgery. 
Role of surgical technique (stripping vs. CHIVA) and surgeon's 
experience. G Chir. 2011 Nov-Dec;32(11-12):460-3 